Aaron Hernandez sued by families of 2012 double shooting victims .
The mounting legal troubles of Aaron Hernandez intensified on Wednesday, when the families of two men who were fatally shot in Boston in 2012 filed wrongful death lawsuits against the former New England Patriot.
The two $6 million lawsuits were filed in Suffolk Superior Court on behalf of the families of Daniel Abreu and Safiro Furtado, records show.
An attorney for the families, William T. Kennedy, could not be reached for comment on Wednesday night. Copies of the civil complaints were not available.
Hernandez, 24, is being held without bail on murder and weapons charges in the June slaying of Odin L. Lloyd of Dorchester, whose bullet-riddled body was found near the athlete's sprawling North Attleborough home. He has pleaded not guilty.
Hernandez is also being investigated for his possible involvement in the slayings of Abreu and Furtado, who were gunned down as they sat in a vehicle early on July 16, 2012 in Boston's South End.
No one has been charged with their murders, but court records indicate that investigators believe Hernandez was driving the silver sport utility vehicle from which the gunman allegedly fired.
Jake Wark, a spokesman for Suffolk District Attorney Daniel F. Conley, declined to comment on the lawsuits.
"The criminal probe into [Abreu and Furtado's] homicides remains very active," Wark said. 
Hernandez's lawyers did not respond to inquiries on Wednesday night, and relatives of Abreu and Furtado could not be reached for comment.
The former Patriot also faces a wrongful death lawsuit from Lloyd's family in Bristol County, as well as a civil action in Florida.
Alexander Bradley, a former associate of Hernandez, alleges in the Florida lawsuit that Hernandez shot him in the eye last February, after they had argued at a Miami strip club.
On Tuesday, lawyers for Bradley and Hernandez requested that the Florida suit be placed on hold for at least 120 days, since both men are currently incarcerated.
"At this juncture, there would seem to be no reason to spend time and resources of the Court when no constructive progress can be made based upon the unavailability of both parties," the attorneys said in a joint legal filing.
Bradley was arrested earlier this month in Hartford after he allegedly sprayed a night club with gunfire in retaliation for being shot in the leg.
Separately, officials at the Bristol County House of Correction and Jail, where Hernandez is being held, are investigating an alleged fight that he had with another inmate on Tuesday morning. No one required medical attention, according to jail officials.
Sheriff Thomas M. Hodgson said Wednesday night that investigators are trying to determine what touched off the brief altercation, as well as whether Hernandez or the other inmate will face internal sanctions or criminal charges.
"We have to wait and see what the evidence shows and what the tapes show," Hodgson said.
