'Star Wars' Adds Lupita Nyong'o, 'Game of Thrones' Star Gwendoline Christie.
Lupita Nyong'o, who won an Oscar earlier this year for her role in the searing Best Picture winner "12 Years a Slave," and Gwendoline Christie of "Game of Thrones" will now be heading to a galaxy far, far away in "Star Wars: Episode VII."
Lucasfilm said Nyong'o, who was long-rumored to be considered for a role in the new entry in the space saga, would be joining a cast that already includes original stars Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher and Harrison Ford, as well as Max Von Sydow, John Boyega, Daisy Ridley, Adam Driver and Oscar Isaac.
Joining them, as well, will be Christie, better known as the towering warrior Brienne of Tarth in HBO's "Game of Thrones."
The original cast announcement in April mentioned two female cast members - Fisher and Ridley - out of 13 total, sparking controversy and criticism online. The additions of Nyong'o and Christie could go a long way in dispelling whatever ill will may have lingered.
Here's the full release from starwars.com:
Lupita Nyong'o joins the recently announced cast of Star Wars: Episode VII. This year, her breakthrough performance in 12 Years a Slave earned her an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.
Gwendoline Christie, currently starring in the hit television series Game of Thrones as Brienne of Tarth, has also been cast in the production. She can next be seen in The Hunger Games: Mockingjay - Part 2.
"I could not be more excited about Lupita and Gwendoline joining the cast of Episode VII," says Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy. "It's thrilling to see this extraordinarily talented ensemble taking shape."
Actors John Boyega, Daisy Ridley, Adam Driver, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson, and Max von Sydow will join the original stars of the Saga Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Mark Hamill, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, and Kenny Baker in the new film.
Star Wars: Episode VII is being directed by J.J. Abrams from a screenplay by Lawrence Kasdan and Abrams. Kathleen Kennedy, Abrams, and Bryan Burk are producing, and John Williams returns as the composer. The movie opens worldwide on December 18, 2015.
