It's Official: 'Full House' Revival Heading to Netflix.
The streaming service made the long-rumored news official with a 13-episode commitment to 'Fuller House.'
Full House is opening its doors again.
Following former star John Stamos' announcement on Monday's Jimmy Kimmel Live!, Netflix confirmed Monday that it is reviving the family sitcom, handing out a 13-episode pickup to sequel Fuller House.
The new incarnation will star original cast members Candace Cameron-Bure (D.J.), her on-screen younger sister, Jodie Sweetin (Stephanie), and Andrea Barber, who played her best friend, Kimmy Gibbler. Stamos will produce and reprise his role as Uncle Jesse in a guest role, while talks are under way to bring back fellow original stars Bob Saget, Mary-Kate  and Ashley Olsen, Dave Coulier and Lori Loughlin.
The revival will premiere on Netflix in 2016 and finds D.J. Tanner-Fuller employed as a vet, pregnant and recently widowed, and living in San Francisco. Stephanie, now an aspiring musician, and single mother Kimmy — along with Kimmy’s feisty teenage daughter, Ramona — all move in to help take care of D.J.’s two boys — the rebellious 12-year-old J.D. and neurotic 7-year-old Max — and her soon-to-arrive baby.
The multicamera comedy hails from Warner Horizon Television, Miller-Boyett Productions and Jeff Franklin Productions. Full House creator Jeff Franklin will return to oversee Fuller House alongside exec producers Robert L. Boyett and Thomas L. Miller.
The series originally aired on ABC from 1987 to 1995. Full House is the latest in a long string of revivals popping up across the TV landscape as broadcast networks and streaming services alike look to known brands to cut through the clutter. Fox recently ordered a six-episode event series for The X Files, and NBC announced a straight-to-series order for a Coach revival starring Craig T. Nelson, with several others in the works.
"The continued support of  Full House fans of all ages for the last 28 years has been astounding," Franklin, Boyett and Miller said in a joint statement confirming the news. "It is an honor and a thrill to catch up with these beloved characters and explore their lives today. The love you saw on the show was real. The cast has remained a loving family off screen all these years. We are as excited as our fans to finally bring Full House back to life.”
For Netflix, Fuller House comes as the streaming service has already revived Wet Hot American Summer, as well as Arrested Development, with another round of the cult comedy considered likely.
The series joins a roster of original comedies at Netflix that also includes Grace and Frankie, Love, Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, Will Arnett's Bojack Horseman and Flaked and more.
