Statue Of Liberty, Liberty Island Evacuated Over Bomb Threat.
All Clear Given Nearly 4 Hours After Caller Threatened To Blow Up Statue.
The Statue of Liberty and Liberty Island were evacuated Friday following a bomb threat.
U.S. Parks Police received a 911 at around 11:21 a.m., with a caller stating they were going to blow up the Statue of Liberty, a National Park Service Statue spokesperson said.
Park police swept the Statue canine units “alerted an area of interest” near the visitor lockers at the base of the statue, officials said.
The New York City Police Department Explosives Ordinance Disposal unit was on the island along with the park police.
NYPD deemed the package safe after conducting primary and secondary searches. Park visitors who have personal belonging in lockers at the park will be allowed to return to claim their belongings.
Photos and videos posted to Twitter showed tourists being evacuated from Liberty Island.
“Statue Cruises is thankful for the prompt and professional response by National Parks Service regarding today’s incident on Liberty Island and greatly appreciates everyone’s cooperation, including emergency personnel and of course all the passengers who sailed with us today,” said Mike Burke, Vice President and COO of Statue Cruises.  “We safely transported approximately 2,700 people from Liberty Island and all were offered full refunds. We are working with NPS to reunite passengers with their belongings left behind as a result of today’s events. Service to Liberty Island will resume Saturday morning at 8:30 am.”
John Blount, of Allentown, Pennsylvania, was in the statue’s crown, chatting with a park ranger.
“All of a sudden he got a call on his phone,” Blount said. “He said ‘OK’, looked up and said, ‘It’s time to leave.’ We had just made it up there.”
He said it was a very calm evacuation down. They got on a boat, and “we were just floating around out there for the past hour and a half.”
His wife’s purse was in a locker; they had to leave without reclaiming their property.
Eric Gustafson, of Worchester, Massachusetts, was on Liberty Island with his wife and son. They were about to enter the building for the tour when park rangers ushered “everyone to the flagpole” and then told them they had to leave.
“They didn’t give us a reason for it. The communication was lacking,” he said. About 90 minutes later, they were back in Manhattan.
They later saw Twitter accounts about a suspicious package.
“We weren’t nervous. It was mostly just frustrating,” he said, adding that the evacuation was very orderly.
Other tourists said they were taken off boats while trying to leave nearby Ellis Island, then those vessels then were used to evacuate Liberty Island.
Karen Mason, 68, of Cincinnati, Ohio, said they had just boarded a boat at Ellis Island at 12:40 p.m. “All of a sudden, they said ‘Disembark, disembark, disembark. We have to evacuate the boat.”’
She said she didn’t feel like she was in any danger. “But we saw helicopters and we knew something was going on,” she said.
