Samsung Pegs Rebound Hopes on Mobile Chips, Cheaper Phones.
Smartphone Sales Slipped Amid Intense Competition.
Samsung Electronics Co. offered signs Thursday that the worst was likely over for its mobile division, as the company turns to mobile chips and cheaper smartphones to spur a recovery in profit.
Samsung said its fourth-quarter profit fell to 5.35 trillion won ($4.9 billion), down 27% from a year earlier and marking a third straight quarter of decline as its mobile division’s operating profit plunged 64%.
The slide came amid intense competition. Data from researchers showed Samsung lost significant smartphone market share in key markets, including China, following rival Apple Inc.’s launch last September of bigger-screen iPhones that have sold well globally.
Data tracker Counterpoint Technology Market Research said that Samsung fell to fifth place among mobile-phone manufacturers in China in the fourth quarter, with just 9% of smartphone sales. A year earlier, Samsung had 17% of the market, but has been surpassed by market leader Apple, as well as Chinese rivals Xiaomi Corp., Lenovo Group Ltd. and Huawei Technologies Co.
But Samsung managed to limit the damage to profit margin at the company’s mobile division, which clocked in at 7.5%. While that is a far cry from the almost 20% profit margin that the mobile division enjoyed for several years, it is a slight improvement from the previous quarter’s 7.1%.
The 27% decline in fourth-quarter net profit from a year earlier was also an improvement from the 49% year-over-year slump the company suffered in the third quarter.
Robert Yi, the company’s head of investor relations, said on a conference call with analysts that 2015 would be a year of “stability, recovery or growth” among its various businesses.
Samsung, meanwhile, lifted its 2014 dividend by 40%, its latest move to appease shareholders and government regulators who have called on South Korea’s biggest companies to loosen their grip on their cash. Executives said on the call that it was too soon to offer guidance on dividends for 2015.
The company is pinning its hopes on new phones and processing chips in smartphones to reverse its fortunes as it readies its new flagship phone for launch. Analysts expect a modest recovery in the company’s bottom line this year on demand for its memory chips and processors.
Samsung could start rolling out a successor to its Galaxy S5 model as early as March, analysts say, in a bid to bolster smartphone sales. A large number of the new phones could come equipped with an internally designed mobile processor, said a person familiar with the matter, unlike previous models that relied heavily on processors from Qualcomm Inc.
The change will help Samsung lift its mobile profit—albeit modestly—and boost the chip unit that makes mobile processors, analysts say.
Samsung has been cutting costs to protect its profit margins. On Tuesday, it said it was expanding a cellphone manufacturing plant in the northern Indian city of Noida. The Indian facility will oversee production of Samsung’s new Z1 smartphone, which its first to be powered by its homegrown operating system, Tizen, an alternative to Google Inc.’s Android platform.
The company said it sold 95 million handsets in the fourth quarter, of which 71 million to 76 million of them were smartphones. Rival Apple sold 74.5 million iPhones in its fiscal first quarter, up 46% from a year earlier.
Fourth-quarter operating profit fell 36% to 5.3 trillion won on an 11% drop in revenue to 52.7 trillion won, Samsung said. The figures were in line with the company’s previous guidance.
