Jordan Spieth (-16) sets 54-hole scoring record, owns 2015 Masters.
Jordan Spieth, meet history. History, meet Jordan Spieth.
Spieth shot a third-round 70 on Saturday and set a Masters 54-hole scoring record at 16-under 200.
Tiger Woods was at 15-under 201 after three rounds in 1997 and Raymond Floyd was at the same number in 1976.
Speaking of Woods, Spieth will need a 3-under 69 on Sunday to break the all-time Masters scoring record of 18-under 270, which Woods set back in 1997.
It wasn't easy for Spieth on Saturday.
The Texan made three bogeys and a double bogey and fanned one out into the gallery on No. 18. With Justin Rose breathing down his neck, Spieth got up and down to maintain a 4-stroke lead over Rose and 5 over Phil Mickelson.
"It was huge," Spieth told CBS about his up and down. "Just to see one go in after the disappointment there at 17. I don't recommend ever hitting it there. Very pleased with having that putt roll right in to get some momentum."
Still, there were plenty of birdies. With Woods, Mickelson and Rory McIlroy spitting fire early on Saturday, Spieth kept his cool and went out in 35. He made seven birdies overall, including this gorgeous one at No. 16.
That pushed Spieth to 18 under (only he and Woods have ever touched that number at Augusta) before he made a double at No. 17.
The 18th was a gut check for Spieth, and he passed that test.
"I had 24 hours from the time I finished until the time I teed off. That's a long time to sit on a lead like that. All in all I kept it together with the putter."
Spieth's wins are never simple and this one, if it happens, will be no exception.
He likes where he's at, however.
"All the time," Spieth answered when asked if he'd thought of this week since losing to Bubba Watson in 2014. "We always think of Masters week.
"This is the greatest week in our sport. Last year definitely left a bad taste in my mouth. I've been looking to get some revenge. I've still got a long way to go."
He does. He'll have to hold off a "has the look" Rose and a Mickelson, who always turns back the clock on Masters week.
Oh yeah, Rory and Tiger will be charging, too.
If Spieth wants to get his first green jacket and a piece of history, he'll definitely have to earn it.
