House Republicans Say Comcast Merger Risks Undue Sway on Channels.
Several House Republicans expressed concern on Thursday that a merger of Comcast and Time Warner Cable would give the new company undue influence over the potential success of cable channels whose programming might compete with Comcast’s.
At a four-hour hearing of the House antitrust subcommittee, representatives from a few, mostly Republican states raised questions about Comcast’s decision after its takeover of NBCUniversal to drop RFD-TV from its cable service in Colorado and New Mexico. RFD focuses on largely rural interests like agribusiness, Western sports and music, and rural lifestyle issues.
Republican and Democratic representatives also raised concerns about Comcast’s post-merger ability to pick winners and losers in the cable and broadband business because of its influence over regional sports networks, several of which it owns, and over Internet video companies whose offerings compete with Comcast’s television programming.
In the end, however, several members expressed the view that, although Congress has no direct authority over the merger, they expect that not enough documented antitrust problems exist to block the deal.
Patrick Gottsch, the founder and chairman of RFD, disagreed. He told the committee that the decision cost RFD roughly 470,000 viewers, about 40 percent of its Comcast customers, in markets where the station’s viewership ranked in the top 25 percent of all cable networks. Since it was dropped, RFD has not been added to Comcast offerings in any area served by the company, he said.
“Because there is no clear business reason to understand Comcast’s decision, we can only speculate that RFD-TV has become competitive with Comcast’s affiliated programming,” Mr. Gottsch told members of the House Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law.
David L. Cohen, the Comcast executive vice president who has been the company’s chief public advocate since the merger was announced, denied that charge. He said the decision was made by local cable programmers and noted that Comcast served primarily urban areas, even in Western states.
Some 600,000 to 700,000 Comcast customers can still receive the service, Mr. Cohen said, and those who cannot get it on Comcast can switch their cable subscription to one of the satellite companies.
Comcast’s primary defense against claims that it faces no competition in most markets for multichannel video programing is that the satellite providers Dish and DirecTV are available to more than 90 percent of Americans.
Mr. Cohen again emphasized that after the merger no cable subscribers in the United States would have fewer choices for delivery of cable television than before the deal.
Nevertheless, the Comcast-Time Warner Cable merger has attracted a growing array of corporate opponents in recent weeks.
Dave Schaeffer, the chief executive of Cogent Communications, a company that provides infrastructure connecting Internet programmers with local broadband providers, told the House panel that “grave anticompetitive and consumer harms” could result from the merger because of Comcast’s capture of broadband customers.
The merged companies will reach 40 percent to 60 percent of wired broadband subscribers in the United States, Mr. Schaeffer said. It will dominate high-speed Internet service in 19 of the country’s 20 largest markets.
“One entity controlling access to so many of America’s ‘captive eyeballs’ should immediately raise red flags,” he said.
Some members of Congress also questioned the assertion that advertisers could have less access to consumers after the merger, because a larger Comcast could control access to roughly 30 percent of cable customers nationwide.
Allen P. Grunes, a partner at GeyerGorey and a former Justice Department antitrust lawyer, said Comcast and Time Warner do compete in the sale of local cable advertising, which takes up two to three minutes of every hour of cable programming.
“If the merger is consummated, the merged firm would likely have the power to increase prices in the spot cable advertising market through its control over a large number of subscribers and key market gateways,” Mr. Grunes said.
Representative Louie Gohmert, a Texas Republican, took the hearing in an unexpected direction when he accused Comcast of keeping Glenn Beck, the conservative television and radio host, off its cable network in favor of Al Jazeera America, which “wanted to get their Sharia law view into us.”
Al Jazeera bought Current TV from Al Gore, the former vice president, in 2013. Mr. Gohmert said Mr. Beck was also offering to buy the channel but was thwarted by a conspiracy between Al Jazeera and Comcast.
Mr. Gohmert said Mr. Beck also had sought to buy another failing cable channel that owed money to Comcast; the congressman cited an anonymous email alleging that Comcast was conspiring to keep Mr. Beck off the air until after the 2014 midterm elections.
Mr. Cohen denied the assertions. Under its contract, he said, the channel at issue was not allowed to include news coverage or political commentary. He added that “there is no judgment being made” about carrying Mr. Beck’s program “based upon its political perspective.”
