Report: FCC recommends Comcast-TWC merger be sent to judge.
Comcast and Time Warner Cable in February 2014 announced a $45.2 billion merger that would combine the two largest cable companies in the U.S.
"Citing unnamed sources, the Wall Street Journal reported April 22 that the FCC is now considering issuing a "hearing designation order" for Comcast's proposed merger with Time Warner Cable. This procedural move suggests the agency does not view the merger as being in the public interest, leaving approval in the hands of an administrative law judge."
"Several other stories in recent days, all based on unnamed sources, have suggested that the Dept. of Justice is also leaning against approving the merger. Comcast met with FCC and DOJ officials on April 22 to assuage concerns they have about the merger. Similar meetings are likely to take place in the coming weeks."
Comcast said as recently as March that it expected to win regulatory approval for the merger "in the middle" of 2015. The company had for much of 2014 forecast approval by "early" 2015. The FCC paused its informal "shot clock" reviewing the merger on March 13 pending the outcome of a lawsuit between Comcast and programming providers.
The lawsuit cited by the FCC concerns the disclosure of certain private information, including how much content providers pay Comcast, to the FCC's "outside counsel and experts."
The proposed merger has come under severe criticism from those who say it would create a monopoly that will ultimately harm consumers. Comcast has repeatedly defended the merger, saying it will not reduce competition because the two companies don't serve the same areas.
Several companies, including Discovery Communications, Dish Network and Netflix, have also publicly opposed the proposed merger, with Dish Network also claiming a combined Comcast-TWC could use its large size to win better terms. Netflix has focused on potential harm in broadband competition.
"[Once merged] we can compete more effectively with our mostly larger national and global competitors, including the Bells, DirecTV, Dish, Apple, and Google, to name a few… Putting any emotion aside, this transaction must be viewed by reference to the facts, sound economic theory, and the law."
Comcast has repeatedly claimed it faces broadband competition from gigabit providers like Google and AT&T and from wireless providers like T-Mobile and Verizon. Critics have countered that these services are either not widely available or comparable in price or performance.
Comcast has supplied several local officials throughout the U.S. with pre-written letters of support for its merger with TWC, according to documents obtained by The Verge. The letters were sent to federal regulators with only minimal input from the officials, the documents show.
"When Comcast makes a promise to act, it is comforting to know that they will always follow through. This is the type of attitude that makes Roswell proud to be involved with such a company, our residents are happy with the services it has provided and continues to provide each day."
Wood's letter, sent to the FCC in August 2014, was pre-written by Comcast, with Wood only adding a closing sentence and his signature. Other such letters have been found among what Comcast has called an "outpouring of thoughtful and positive comments" from local officials.
Comcast has defended the tactic by saying that it merely "reached out" to policy makers to "detail the public interest benefit" of the merger. Comcast also claimed that, ultimately, it was up to the local officials whether or not they actually sent the letters, and thus the company could not be held responsible for their actions.
"The atmospherics around our customer service clearly stir some antipathy among some consumers. And it does provide a basis for opponents of the transaction to gin up three-sentence, nonsubstantive communications to the F.C.C. saying that they don't like Comcast or they don't like Time Warner Cable."
In an April 5 New York Times article, Comcast defended its conduct throughout the merger approval process. The company denied directly paying any groups for the sole purpose of winning their public support, and said the deal should only be considered from a legal and technical standpoint, and not whether or not the company is well-liked.
