Netflix buys a new 'Full House'.
Full House is coming back. Uncle Jesse says so.
John Stamos, who played Jesse Katsopolis on the popular ABC family comedy of the late 1980s and early 1990s, confirmed rumors of the show's reboot Monday on ABC's Jimmy Kimmel Live, telling the host Netflix had ordered 13 episodes of the new comedy. He said the series would kick off with a one-hour special.
Later in the evening, the streaming service put out its own announcement, saying Fuller House, as the new series will be called, will premiere in 2016. The spinoff will star Full House veterans Candace Cameron-Bure, Jodie Sweetin and Andrea Barber, with Stamos set to produce and guest star.
Netflix says it is talking to other Full House stars, including Bob Saget, Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen, Dave Coulier and Lori Loughlin, about participating as guest stars. Warner Horizon Television will produce the new series, with Full House creator Jeff Franklin serving as creator and an executive producer.
Stamos told Kimmel that Fuller House will focus on D.J. Tanner-Fuller (Cameron-Bure) and her children; her sister, Stephanie Tanner (Sweetin); and their memorable kooky neighbor, Kimmy Gibbler (Barber). The new series, filmed in the multi-camera style of Full House, will be a group-raising-a-family endeavor, as the original was.
According to the Netflix announcement, Fuller House will continue the adventures that began in the original, eight-season comedy, "with veterinarian D.J. Tanner-Fuller pregnant and recently widowed, living in San Francisco. D.J.'s younger sister/aspiring musician Stephanie Tanner and D.J.'s lifelong best friend/fellow single mother Kimmy Gibbler, along with Kimmy's feisty teenage daughter Ramona, all move in to help take care of D.J.'s two boys – the rebellious 12-year-old J.D. and neurotic 7-year-old Max – and her soon-to-arrive baby."
Netflix acknowledged the large fan base of the original series, which premiered in 1987.
"As big fans of the original Full House, we are thrilled to be able to introduce Fuller House's new narrative to existing fans worldwide, who grew up on the original, as well as a new generation of global viewers that have grown up with the Tanners in syndication," Cindy Holland, Netflix vice president of original content, said in a statement.
Franklin and fellow executive producers Robert L. Boyett and Thomas L. Miller, who also worked on the original, said: "The continued support of Full House fans of all ages for the last 28 years has been astounding. It is an honor and a thrill to catch up with these beloved characters and explore their lives today. The love you saw on the show was real. The cast has remained a loving family off screen all these years. We are as excited as our fans to finally bring Full House back to life."
