Samsung net profit falls 39% from same quarter in 2014.
Samsung has been increasing its reliance on its display and semiconductor divisions in the face of increased smartphone competition.
"In the second quarter, the company expects its overall earnings to increase compared to the previous quarter."
Samsung posted its Q1 2015 results April 29. Its operating profit was $5.64 billion, down 29.6% year-on-year, with operating profit from its mobile division down 57%. Net profit was $4.3 billion, down 39% year-on-year. However, Samsung said that its chip business will "see demand" moving forward.
Samsung on April 10 released the Galaxy S6, which the company hopes can help turn around its struggling smartphone division. The smartphone won critical acclaim, with critics highlighting its use of high-end materials compared to previous Samsung smartphones.
Samsung on Jan. 29 posted its first annual loss in three years following a weak Q4 2014. The company's mobile unit, which includes its smartphone business, posted its fifth straight quarterly decline. While Samsung did earn $4.9 billion in profit (down 27% from a year earlier), smartphone rival Apple earned $18 billion in profit.
"Bloomberg reported April 15, citing a person with 'direct knowledge' of the matter, that Samsung earlier this month created a division that's dedicated to working with Apple to create displays for that company's devices. One analyst said the new division suggests the two companies are getting along better than they had in the past."
Samsung will freeze the salaries of all employees in South Korea this year because business conditions are "not optimistic," the company said Feb. 26. Samsung last froze employee wages in 2009 in repose to the global financial crisis. Samsung had 99,556 employees in South Korea through Sept. 2014.
Samsung in Q2 2014 was overtaken by Chinese smartphone maker Xioami (pictured) as the top smartphone vendor in China. Apple, boosted by strong sales of the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus, has since overtaken both companies as the top smartphone vendor in China.
