U.S. to Expedite Munition Deliveries for Yemen Fight.
Support includes deliveries of precision-guided munitions, intelligence and logistical aid.
The U.S. said on Tuesday that it is expediting deliveries of munitions and building on intelligence and logistical aid that it is already providing for the Saudi-led military campaign against Houthi rebels in Yemen.
Deputy Secretary of State Tony Blinken told reporters at a briefing in Riyadh that Saudi Arabia “is sending a strong message to the Houthis and their allies that they cannot overrun Yemen by force.”
The support, which includes deliveries of precision-guided munitions, comes almost two weeks after a Saudi-led coalition of mostly Arab states began a campaign of airstrikes against the Shiite-linked Houthis.
In Washington, Col. Steve Warren, the chief Pentagon spokesman, said the shipments were “a combination of pre-existing orders made by our partner nations and some new requirements as they expend munitions.” He didn’t provide details.
Houthi militants overtook Yemen’s capital, San’a, in September and took control of the government in February, leading the Saudi-backed President Abed Rabbo Mansour Hadi to flee to Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Blinken, who met with Mr. Hadi and senior Saudi officials on Tuesday, said the U.S. and the Gulf Cooperation Council states are working to push all parties in Yemen to commit to a political solution.
Also on Tuesday, the Education Ministry in Ibb province, near the contested southern port city of Aden, said three students were killed and six were injured in a series of explosions that rocked a military base next to a school.
The ministry attributed the explosions at the Al Hamza military base to the Saudi-led air campaign, but that couldn’t be independently confirmed.
Aided by the airstrikes, forces aligned with Mr. Hadi have made tentative gains in Aden and other southern areas in the past week.
On Tuesday, officials in Aden said that the Houthis held about two-thirds of the city, but that they had lost their grip on the port, a key target, to Mr. Hadi’s forces.
As the air campaign continues, aid agencies are raising concern about shortages of medicine, electricity, potable water and food in Aden and San’a.
The International Committee of the Red Cross began to fly in aid on Tuesday, and the World Health Organization has supplied health kits from local warehouses to 240,000 beneficiaries since March 19.
Agencies said they have been trying to coordinate cease-fires with Saudi Arabia and local authorities to safely send in supplies.
Saudi Brig. Gen. Ahmed Asiri, a spokesman for the coalition carrying out the strikes, said that they were working with humanitarian organizations to facilitate aid deliveries, adding that permission had been given to dock a medical-supply ship heading from Djibouti to Aden.
“The needs are huge and the sooner we are allowed to send additional supplies into the country without restrictions in access, the more lives we can save,” said Ahmed Shadoul, WHO’s representative in Yemen.
According to the Houthi-controlled Health Ministry, more than 650 civilians have been killed by the Saudi-led airstrikes. An additional 1,350 have been injured, the ministry said.
Mr. Blinken said the U.S. was working closely with the Saudis to limit civilian casualties. “If there are even unintended civilian casualties, you risk alienating the very people you’re trying to help and who you need on your side,” he said.
Col. Warren said U.S. personnel have been assigned to a joint U.S.-Saudi coordination cell and are helping provide intelligence for use in the war effort in Yemen, but declined to provide specifics of the aid. “We are providing them intelligence as we are able,” Col. Warren said.
Col. Warren also said Saudi officials have requested that they have the opportunity to use American air-refueling tankers as needed. Members of the coalition using air refueling tankers will have to reimburse the U.S. for the cost of any fuel used. The Saudis have not yet used American tankers, Col. Warren said, but “they have requested that this capability be made available.”
