Airstrike hits Yemeni city after Saudi Arabia announces end to bombing.
Saudi Arabia launched a military campaign in Yemen while a number of rival figures and groups are vying for power as years of sporadic conflict spiraled out of control.
"The coalition will continue to prevent the movement of Houthi militias from moving or undertaking any operations inside Yemen."
Asseri said April 21 that the Saudi-led coalition would end its bombing campaign in Yemen by the end of day, but airstrikes continued April 22, according to residents and an official in Taiz in southern Yemen.
The shift in operations does not signal a ceasefire, Asseri said. Following the announcement, Saudi Arabia's King Salman ordered the country's National Guard to reinforce the border with Yemen. Ex-president and Houthi ally Ali Abdullah Saleh praised the announcement and called for dialogue.
"This is an absolute outrage particularly when one considers that we have shared detailed information with the Coalition on the locations of our offices and storage facilities."
An airstrike by the Saudi-led coalition destroyed an Oxfam storage facility, Oxfam said April 19. No one was killed. "The warehouse had no military value," Oxfam said. "It only contained humanitarian supplies associated with our previous work in Saada, bringing clean water to thousands of households."
An April 20 Saudi airstrike on a hillside tore through the Yemeni capital, killing at least 25 people and wounding nearly 400 people, according to witnesses and medics. Although the attack appeared to target a military site, debris flew through the city and reverberations caused significant destruction.
The Yemeni government-in-exile told Reuters April 18 that it rejected a four-point peace plan submitted by Iran to the UN. The Iranian plan calls for a ceasefire, humanitarian aid, resuming a national dialogue and "an inclusive national unity government." A Yemeni spokesman in Qatar called it "a political maneuver."
"Health facilities are struggling to function as they face increasing shortages of life-saving medicines and vital health supplies, frequent disruptions in power supply and lack of fuel for generators. Lack of fuel has also disrupted functionality of ambulances and the delivery of health supplies across the country."
An April 21 WHO statement warns of "an imminent collapse of health care services in Yemen." Many people cannot reach health facilities due to conflict.
The UN on April 17 launched an emergency appeal of $273.7 million for Yemen as Saudi airstrikes were pounding most of the country. The conflict occurs amid "a humanitarian crisis that was already one of the largest and most complex in the world," the UN said. Saudi Arabia pledged to meet the appeal on April 18.
"[Children] are being killed, maimed and forced to flee their homes, their health threatened and their education interrupted."
At least 944 people were killed, including 77 children, and 3,487 injured since the start of airstrikes as of April 17, the UN said April 21. Medical supply deliveries have been delayed. Food, water and electricity shortages occur nationwide. The first shipments of emergency medical aid reached Aden April 8.
Saudi Arabia launched military operations including airstrikes against the Houthis and their allies in Yemen on March 25. It deployed 100 fighter jets, 150,000 troops and navy units. Yemeni officials requested foreign military support days earlier. Yemeni President Mansour Hadi fled to Saudi Arabia, Saudi state TV reported March 26.
"For the first time, Al-Qaeda is building a strategic alliance with the tribes. It is a strengthened and dangerous Al-Qaeda."
Benomar was the UN's envoy to Yemen, but stepped down April 15 and asked for a reassignment. He expressed concerns about Al-Qaeda to the New York Times the same day. U.S. Defense Secretary Ashton Carter also said in a news conference that gains by Al-Qaeda were "of serious concern."
The UN Security Council voted April 14 to impose an arms embargo on Houthis, as well as former president Ali Abdullah Saleh. Russia abstained from the vote. The Security Council imposed sanctions against several Houthi leaders in February, three months after the UN and U.S. first imposed sanctions in Nov. 2014.
One of Yemen's largest electricity plants stopped working, as much of the country was already facing extended power cuts, local reports said. A liquified natural gas plant, the country's largest industrial investment, halted production due to the conflict. About 115,000 people have been displaced, the UN said.
The U.S. has "expedited weapons deliveries" and "increased intelligence" to Saudi Arabia, U.S. Deputy Sec. of State Antony Blinken said April 7. The weapons include existing orders and "some new requirements" said the Pentagon. Blinken also warned of the consequences of "unintended civilian casualties."
The conflict's start in Aden appeared to be part of a struggle between Hadi and ex-president Ali Abdullah Saleh. Hadi was the VP of Saleh, who was ousted in a 2011 uprising. An initiative by Gulf countries guaranteed Saleh's exit and set up elections in which Hadi was the sole candidate, but the country continued to struggle.
