E.U. Charges Russian Energy Giant Gazprom With Abusing Its Dominance.
European antitrust regulators on Wednesday charged the Russian energy giant Gazprom with abusing its dominance in natural gas markets, a move amounting to a direct challenge to the authorities in Moscow.
The European Commission, the European Union’s executive arm, said that unfair pricing might have resulted in higher gas prices in Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, which have long been wholly or substantially dependent on Russian gas. In those countries, the commission said, Gazprom was suspected of charging wholesalers prices that were significantly higher compared with the company’s costs or to benchmark prices.
In response on Wednesday, Gazprom suggested that it was not subject to the European Union’s antitrust jurisdiction because it is a state-controlled company — effectively an arm of the Russian government. Gazprom added that it had been “empowered by the laws of the Russian Federation with special socially significant functions and has the status of a strategic government-controlled business entity.”
In accusing Gazprom of unfairly pricing gas and restricting how customers use it, the European Commission is taking aim at Europe’s biggest source of natural gas and one of Russia’s most powerful corporate enterprises — although one whose clout has been made weaker by global energy market forces and geopolitical tensions.
The case could results in billions of dollars in penalties, as well as limits on Gazprom’s business practices across Europe, although some analysts predicted that there was room for settling the dispute. In the meantime, the charges heighten the tensions between the West and Russia over the Kremlin’s involvement in the crisis in Ukraine.
The European Commission also suspects Gazprom of quashing competition by restricting gas flows to some parts of Europe. Gazprom seems to be “pursuing an overall strategy to partition Central and Eastern European gas markets, for example by reducing its customers’ ability to resell the gas cross-border,” the commission said.
It also said that Gazprom might have been leveraging its powerful market position in Bulgaria and Poland by making supplies of gas conditional on those countries’ participating in infrastructure projects, like plans for new pipelines to carry even more Russian gas into Europe.
“Keeping national gas markets separate also allowed Gazprom to charge prices that we, at this stage, consider to be unfair,” said Margrethe Vestager, the European Union’s competition commissioner.
“If our concerns were confirmed, Gazprom would have to face the legal consequences of its behavior,” she said.
Gazprom could eventually face a fine theoretically running higher than 10 billion euros, or about $10.7 billion. But the larger worry for Gazprom is the prospect of being forced to allow more competition in markets it has long controlled. Russia supplies about one-third of the European Union’s natural gas.
Gazprom said in a statement that it “considers the objections put forward by the European Commission to be unfounded.”
The company added that it “strictly adheres to all the norms of international law and national legislation,” and that its pricing policies “are in full conformity with the standards observed by other producers and exporters of natural gas.”
Christopher J. Weafer, a senior partner at Macro-Advisory, a Moscow-based business consulting firm, said that the European Union is “in a stronger position to take on Gazprom than it has been before” because of new supplies of gas opening up for Europe. He noted gas production in Azerbaijan at the end of this decade and the potential of gas from Iran, which has comparable reserves to Russia.
“The commission seems intent on putting a cap on Gazprom’s position,” Mr. Weafer said. “They can do that.”
He said that the only leverage that Gazprom has is to refuse new contracts to European customers, but that “that would be pretty much cutting off their nose to spite their face.”
He said there was the possibility of a settlement, with Gazprom easing some of its pricing and gas-flow restrictions while gaining permission to expand its pipeline capacity in northern Europe. But he said that the “political rhetoric is going to be tough.”
“The Kremlin is going to complain about this in fairly clear terms,” he said.
Jonathan Stern, chairman of the gas program at the Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, said that the commission’s statement was very conciliatory and that many of the charges could be resolved.
He estimated that only 14 percent of Gazprom’s gas for Europe was affected, noting that countries where its practices were under investigation — Austria, the Czech Republic and Hungary — had been dropped from the commission’s review.
Gazprom would most likely agree to remove the restrictions from contracts in Eastern Europe on how customers can use the gas they buy, he said, but in the absence of competing energy sources, it may be difficult to agree on pricing the fuel in any other way than by linking it to oil prices. The company will probably point out that oil linkage has until recently been the predominant way of pricing gas in Europe and remains largely in effect in Asia.
The regulators’ move is a frontal challenge to President Vladimir V. Putin’s economic and geopolitical strategy by potentially limiting Russia’s ability to set prices favoring some customers and penalizing others.
President Dalia Grybauskaite of Lithuania, the country that called most vigorously for formal charges, said, “The decision is a strong signal to consumers and the market that rules apply to everyone.”
“The era of Kremlin-backed political and economic blackmail draws to a close,” said Ms. Grybauskaite, who also called for “swift and conclusive” results in the case.
The charges represent the second major move in a week by Ms. Vestager, who has sought to reinvigorate antitrust enforcement in Europe since taking office six months ago. Last Wednesday, she filed formal charges accusing Google of abusing its dominance in the market for online search in Europe.
