EU files antitrust charges against Russian energy giant Gazprom.
Regulators claim the world's biggest gasoline producer is abusing its dominance while stifling movement and manipulating the price of oil.
The European Commission (EC) filed antitrust charges against Russian energy giant Gazprom on April 22, claiming the world's largest producer of gas has gouged prices and is abusing its power. The charges amount to a challenge of Russian President Vladimir Putin's geopolitical and economic strategy. One-third of the European Union's natural gas is supplied by Russia.
"All companies that operate in the European market — no matter if they are European or not — have to play by our EU rules."
The EC began its investigation in 2012, looking into Gazprom's alleged anti-competitive practices, including restricting the free flow of gas to EU member nations, manipulating prices and trying to maintain market control by preventing diversification.
The EC drafted the allegations in the summer of 2014, but because Russia controls so much of the market, it feared backlash. Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland are almost entirely dependent on Russian gas. It also delayed filing the charges in Sept. 2014 so as not to disturb the first Minsk ceasefire deal or negotiations with Russia regarding Ukraine's winter gas supply.
"[Gazprom is] empowered by the laws of the Russian Federation with special socially significant functions and has the status of a strategic government-controlled business entity."
The company has 12 weeks to respond to the charges, but Gazprom called the allegations "unfounded" in an April 22 statement. If found guilty Gazprom could face a fine of approximately $10.7 billion or be forced to allow more competition.
Russia's oil output hit a post-Soviet high in 2014, averaging 10.58 million barrels per day, up 0.7% from 2013, according to Energy Ministry data. Reuters reports that much of the production gains came from small private firms, which increased their output by 11% to about 1 million barrels per day.
Russian oil producer Gazprom recorded an annual output fall of 9% amid the ongoing natural gas pricing dispute with neighboring Ukraine. In 2014, Gazprom produced only 432 billion cubic meters of natural gas, an all-time low.
Several Eastern European countries have noted a drop in deliveries from Gazprom, Reuters reported Sept. 17. Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller told the Russian government that Gazprom was meeting its contractual obligations with Europe, but was unable to meet extra volumes asked for. The European Commission said its reserves are adequate, but has voiced concerns about the long term.
In September 2014, Gazprom cut its 2014 production forecast from 496.4 billion cubic meters (bcm) to 463 bcm.
Russia's oil and gas sector accounts for about half of Russia's GDP. Despite the size of the sector, Russia continues to take measures to diversify its economy to end Russia's dependence on other countries for oil.
