Spieth's Masters lead shrinks to 4 as green jacket awaits.
There's doubt now.
Just when it seemed like Sunday would be a celebratory parade for Jordan Spieth, the 21-year-old Texan made double-bogey 6 on the 17th hole in the third round of the Masters.
Instead of carrying a nearly insurmountable lead in the final round, Spieth's 2-under 70 reduced his five-shot overnight edge to four heading into Sunday. Spieth is still on pace to topple Tiger Woods' 72-hole tournament record of 18-under 270, but, at 16 under through three rounds – a 54-hole record at the Masters – a first major win is not a certainty.
Instead of having a tee time with journeyman Charley Hoffman as he did Saturday, Spieth now has to play with 2013 U.S. Open champion Justin Rose. Rose birdied five of his last six holes to shoot 67, get to 12-under par and land a spot in the final pairing – a great omen considering 20 of the last 24 Masters champs have come from the final group.
Three-time Masters winner Phil Mickelson, who also shot a Saturday 67, is a shot behind Rose. Hoffman is not out of it, shooting 71 to reach 10 under and have an outside chance to catch Spieth.
Things could have been even tighter for Spieth. He sprayed his approach on 18 to the right of the green and into the gallery, leaving him in an almost impossible spot from which to get up and down. But that's exactly what he did, flopping a pitch that was Mickelson-esque to within nine feet, then drained the putt to save par and, maybe, a bit of confidence as he walked to the clubhouse.
A slew of players are tied for fifth a 6-under total, including Tiger Woods, whose 68 was his lowest major round in four years, and Rory McIlroy, seeking to complete the career Grand Slam.
McIlroy could tell Spieth a little something about four-stroke, 54-hole leads at the Masters. In 2011, he went into the final round with a four-stroke edge over a quartet of players only to shoot 80 on Sunday, finishing a mind-blowing 10 strokes behind eventual winner Charl Schwartzel.
