Bloomberg report: US leaning against approving Comcast-TWC merger.
Comcast and Time Warner Cable in February 2014 announced a $45.2 billion merger that would combine the two largest cable companies in the U.S.
Comcast said March 25 that it now expects regulatory approval for its deal to acquire Time Warner Cable to occur "in the middle" of 2015, owing to the FCC's recent decision to pause its informal "shot clock" pending the review of a court case.
As recently as February, Comcast had said it expected approval by "early 2015."
The FCC on March 13 paused its informal "shot clock" reviewing the proposed merger because it's waiting for a court decision related to the companies' programming contracts.
The case concerns the disclosure of certain private information, including how much content providers pay Comcast, to the FCC's "outside counsel and experts."
The proposed merger has come under severe criticism from those who say it would create a monopoly that will ultimately harm consumers.
Comcast has repeatedly defended the merger, saying it will not reduce competition because the two companies don't serve the same areas.
Several companies, including Discovery Communications, Dish Network and Netflix, have also publicly opposed the proposed merger, with Dish Network also claiming a combined Comcast-TWC could use its large size to win better terms.
Netflix has focused on potential harm in broadband competition.
Comcast has supplied several local officials throughout the U.S. with pre-written letters of support for its merger with TWC, according to documents obtained by The Verge.
The letters were sent to federal regulators with only minimal input from the officials, the documents show.
Comcast has defended the tactic by saying that it merely "reached out" to policy makers to "detail the public interest benefit" of the merger.
Comcast also claimed that, ultimately, it was up to the local officials whether or not they actually sent the letters, and thus the company could not be held responsible for their actions.
Comcast added 6,000 new video subscribers in Q4 2014, down from 46,000 new video subscribers the year before and below analysts' estimates of 25,000 new video subscribers.
The company also added 375,000 new broadband customers, below estimates of 384,000 new broadband customers.
The posted earnings of 77 cents per share, one cent shy of estimates.
"Bloomberg reported April 17 that U.S. antitrust regulators are currently leaning against approving the proposed merger between Comcast and Time Warner Cable" Nicholas Deleon, Circa Technology Editor.
"[Once merged] we can compete more effectively with our mostly larger national and global competitors, including the Bells, DirecTV, Dish, Apple, and Google, to name a few...
Putting any emotion aside, this transaction must be viewed by reference to the facts, sound economic theory, and the law" David L. Cohen, EVP and Chief Diversity Officer at Comcast.
Comcast has repeatedly claimed it faces broadband competition from gigabit providers like Google and AT&T; and from wireless providers like T-Mobile and Verizon.
Critics have countered that these services are either not widely available or comparable in price or performance.
"When Comcast makes a promise to act, it is comforting to know that they will always follow through.
This is the type of attitude that makes Roswell proud to be involved with such a company, our residents are happy with the services it has provided and continues to provide each day," Jere Wood, mayor of Roswell, Georgia.
Wood's letter, sent to the FCC in August 2014, was pre-written by Comcast, with Wood only adding a closing sentence and his signature.
Other such letters have been found among what Comcast has called an "outpouring of thoughtful and positive comments" from local officials.
"The atmospherics around our customer service clearly stir some antipathy among some consumers.
And it does provide a basis for opponents of the transaction to gin up three-sentence, nonsubstantive communications to the F.C.C.
saying that they don't like Comcast or they don't like Time Warner Cable," David L. Cohen, Executive Vice President at Comcast.
In an April 5 New York Times article, Comcast defended its conduct throughout the merger approval process.
The company denied directly paying any groups for the sole purpose of winning their public support, and said the deal should only be considered from a legal and technical standpoint, and not whether or not the company is well-liked.

