Aaron Hernandez found guilty of first degree murder, sentenced to life without parole.
Former New England Patriots star tight end Aaron Hernandez had pleaded not guilty to the murder of his friend Odin Lloyd, a semiprofessional football player.
After deliberations that lasted over 35 hours, the jury unanimously found Aaron Hernandez guilty of first degree murder April 15. The conviction carries life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. State law requires an automatic appeal of the conviction.
Judge E. Susan Garsh instructed the jury and sent them to deliberate after a trial lasting more than two months. The jury will have three choices on a verdict for Hernandez's murder charge: not guilty, guilty of first-degree murder, or guilty of second-degree murder.
Two jurors said a vehicle from Boston NBC affiliate WHDH-TV was present in their parking lot the night of April 8, and that it approached jurors' vehicles. Both jurors remained on the jury after speaking with Judge E. Susan Garsh and affirming that the incident would not affect their deliberations. WHDH said they did not approach, talk to, or film any juror.
All testimony in the trial concluded on April 6. The defense rested after calling three witnesses to the stand, including a pharmacologist who testified that PCP can cause "violent or aggressive behavior."
Testimony on March 23 revealed that in 2013 Hernandez transferred $15,000 to the father of a Florida man who has pleaded guilty to charges in relation to Lloyd's murder. A bank teller testified that Hernandez personally instructed her to transfer the money after he deposited $1.8 million in checks from the Patriots.
Soon after the money was sent, the man sent guns and a car to Hernandez, according to the prosecution. One of the guns, not the murder weapon, was found at the scene of the murder. The car, with one of the other guns inside, was found in Hernandez's garage.
A former friend of Hernandez testified on April 1 that he saw the man Hernandez would later send $15,000 hand a Glock pistol to Hernandez in a Florida hotel room in Feb. 2013. Alexander Bradley also testified that Hernandez was quick to take offense, was paranoid, and kept cash, marijuana and a handgun in a safe in his basement.
Bradley sold Hernandez several ounces of marijuana each week in 2010 before they became friends. In 2013 Hernandez allegedly shot Bradley in the face after a night of partying and dumped him in a field. The judge ruled that Bradley, who is blind in one eye, could only testify about his relationship with Hernandez prior to that event.
Kyle Aspinwall, a district sales manager and product representative from Glock, testified March 11 that still images from Hernandez's home security image show the defendant holding a Glock pistol. The stills were taken after Lloyd was murdered, according the prosecution's timeline of events. The murder weapon was not found.
Judge Garsh struck some of Aspinwall's testimony March 12 after she questioned him privately over how he had formed his opinion that the object Hernandez was carrying was a Glock. Jurors were told they could consider Aspinwall's testimony that he thought it was a gun, but not his opinion on its characteristics, like the trigger guard.
Prosecutors Feb. 26 showed a surveillance video from a gas station that Hernandez stopped at on the night of Lloyd's murder. The video shows Hernandez buying chewing gum. The prosecution has cited chewing gum found in a rental car as an important piece of evidence.
Lloyd was a friend of Hernandez and was dating the sister of the NFL player's fiancee. Prosecutors say that Hernandez "orchestrated the execution" of Lloyd because, while the two men were out together at a night club on June 14, 2013, Lloyd had talked to people that Hernandez "had troubles with."
Lloyd was shot multiple times, including twice from above as he was lying on the ground, around 3:20am on June 17, 2013, in an industrial park one mile from Hernandez's home. Shell casings found in a car rented by Hernandez after he returned it matched casings found at the crime scene.
Hernandez associates Ernest Wallace and Carlos Ortiz were both charged April 11, 2014, with the murder of Odin Lloyd. The men had previously been charged in the case as accessories to murder after the fact.
Aaron Hernandez pleaded not guilty in May 2014 to a double homicide charge from 2012. On June 19, 2014, the families of the deceased men expanded a wrongful death lawsuit against Hernandez to include the New England Patriots and team owner Robert Kraft.
New England Patriots owner Robert Kraft testified March 31 that Hernandez told him at Gillette Stadium on June 19, 2013, that he did not commit the crime and that he was "in a club" at the time the shooting occurred. Kraft said he vowed to support Hernandez at the time.
                

