Ohio lawmakers advance bill saying Connecticut was not 'first in flight'
Connecticut lawmakers passed a bill in 2013 stating that a German-born state resident staged the first successful human flight, before the Wright brothers.
A panel of Ohio state lawmakers unanimously backed a bill April 14 that rejects a position approved by Connecticut state lawmakers declaring Connecticut first in flight. The bill now moves on to a vote by the full state House.
In 2013, Connecticut passed a bill claiming that Bridgeport resident Gustave Whitehead was the first person to achieve flight at the turn of the 20th century, rather than the Wright brothers. The bill created a holiday called "Powered Flight Day."
Connecticut claims that German-born aviator Gustave Whitehead took flight in August of 1901, more than two years before the 1903 flight in Kitty Hawk, NC, of the famed Wright Brothers, widely known as the grandfathers of aviation.
"Two years, four months, and three days before the Wright brothers, somebody else flew first… It's really a radical revision of the history of aviation."
Brown says he has photographic evidence — albeit very blurry — showing Gustave flying the first motorized aircraft in Connecticut in 1901.
"Gimme a break… I have not seen anything that convinced me that Whitehead got off the ground in a powered machine at all."
Crouch has written four books on the Wright brothers and has studied Gustave Whitehead. Other experts are also skeptical that Whitehead flew first.
"The Smithsonian… shall [not] publish or permit to be displayed a statement or label… any aircraft model or design of earlier date than the Wright Aeroplane of 1903, claiming in effect that such aircraft was capable of carrying a man under its own power in controlled flight."
The text of a 1948 contract between the Smithsonian and the estate of Orville Wright states that the museum may not display any other airplane as the first in flight, under penalty of losing the Wright plane.
The Wright brothers' historic 59-second flight took place on Dec. 17, 1903, in North Carolina.
