Volkswagen Chairman Ferdinand Piech Resigns.
Piech’s wife also announces resignation from ‘all mandates’ within German auto maker.
An era at one of Europe’s biggest corporations ended dramatically Saturday when Ferdinand Piech, chairman of Volkswagen AG and grandson of the company’s founder, unexpectedly resigned after losing a rancorous battle to oust Chief Executive Martin Winterkorn.
Mr. Piech has dominated Volkswagen for decades, steering the company’s rise to become a global automotive group with more than 600,000 employees that is poised to overtake Toyota Motor Corp. and General Motors Co. as the world’s biggest auto maker by sales.
In his latest move he tried to oust the company’s embattled CEO for misreading global markets and costing Volkswagen precious momentum in its heated competition with Toyota and GM. But his attack failed, abruptly ending one of corporate Germany’s most storied careers and opening the door for sweeping management change.
“Piech’s departure represents a seismic shift in Volkswagen’s power structure, and could foretell drastic changes in how one of the world’s largest auto makers operates,” said Karl Brauer, an automotive analyst at research group Kelly Blue Book.
Mr. Piech tendered his resignation after the executive committee of Volkswagen’s supervisory board met in Braunschweig, near the company’s headquarters, and concluded that the board could no longer work together with Mr. Piech.
“The mutual trust that is needed for successful cooperation no longer exists,” Volkswagen’s supervisory board said in a statement.
Berthold Huber, deputy chairman of the committee and former head of the IG Metall trade union, will assume Mr. Piech’s duties until a new chairman is elected. That could take place as soon as May 5 at the next annual shareholder’s meeting.
Mr. Piech and his cousin, Wolfgang Porsche, are the company’s main shareholders, controlling 51% of the voting stock through their family investment company Porsche Automobil Holding SE. Mr. Piech will remain on the board of the family holding company.
But Mr. Porsche may emerge stronger as his cousin’s star fades. Shortly after Volkswagen announced Mr. Piech’s resignation, Mr. Porsche issued a statement backing Volkswagen’s management and expressing regret for the crisis unleashed by Mr. Piech’s efforts to undermine the CEO.
“We have complete confidence in the management of Volkswagen AG and regret the developments of the past few days,” said Mr. Porsche, adding that Porsche SE would continue demonstrate “great loyalty” as Volkswagen’s anchor shareholder.
Mr. Piech wrote in his memoir “Auto Biography” that Volkswagen was just three months away from insolvency when he became CEO in 1993. In the nine years that followed he modernized the company’s manufacturing processes, acquired new brands, and laid the foundation for Volkswagen’s global rise.
Volkswagen now has nine separate car brands and sold 10.2 million vehicles last year, generating €202 billion ($219.6 billion) in revenue. But Volkswagen lags behind its competition in profitability. The company’s namesake VW brand is struggling in the United States, Brazil and other key markets. In China, the company’s biggest source of profits, sales fell in the first quarter.
“There is no guarantee that 2015 is going to be a successful year,” Christian Klingler, a Volkswagen board member who is in charge of global sales and marketing, warned recently when the company released sales figures for the first three months of the year.
Mr. Piech is known for quickly getting rid of executives that have lost his favor. In 2006, Mr. Piech pulled the rug out from Volkswagen CEO Bernd Pieschetsrieder by stating in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that the CEO’s future was uncertain. Mr. Pieschetsrieder was replaced in 2007 with Martin Winterkorn, a protege of Mr. Piech and then CEO of Volkswagen’s luxury car brand Audi AG
When Mr. Piech moved against Mr. Pieschetsrieder in 2006 he had the backing of Bernd Osterloh, the powerful head of Volkswagen’s works council. But when Mr. Piech put Mr. Winterkorn in his cross hairs, Mr. Osterloh and other labor leaders rushed to defend the CEO.
“The last two weeks have created uncertainty in the minds of the workforce,” said Berthold Huber, acting chairman and former head of the IG Metall trade union. “This uncertainty had to be ended today.”
