March existing-home sales rise 6.1% to 5.19 million rate.
Springing back from a tough winter and supported by the growing economy, sales of used homes in March reached the fastest pace in 18 months, according to data released Wednesday.
If such strong results keep up, 2015 could be the best year for used-home sales in almost a decade, said Lawrence Yun, chief economist of the National Association of Realtors.
“After a quiet start to the year, sales activity picked up greatly throughout the country,” he said. “The combination of low interest rates and the ongoing stability in the job market is improving buyer confidence and finally releasing some of the sizable pent-up demand that accumulated in recent years.”
Sales of existing homes rose 6.1% in March to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 5.19 million, the fastest pace in 18 months, the National Association of Realtors reported Wednesday. Economists polled by MarketWatch had expected a March rate of 5.08 million, after a slightly revised 4.89 million pace in February.
Treasury yields shot higher after the housing data.
Markets are tuning into today’s data to get an early indication for how buying activity will fare during this year’s hot home-selling season. Deal making tends to pick up with the warmer weather. For context, the pace of total existing-home sales is down almost one-third from the bubble peak.
But there are still reasons to be cautious about home sales. Prominent economists met at a forum Tuesday in Washington and warned that weak income growth and few first-time buyers have been holding back home sales. And here’s another worry: The government recently reported that monthly job gains hit the slowest pace in more than a year.
Difficult-to-get mortgages are also hobbling home sales, as are too few homes on the market, experts say. On Wednesday NAR reported that March’s inventory was 2 million existing homes for sale, a 4.6-month supply at the current sales pace. A healthier supply would be closer to 6 months. The tight supply is pushing up home prices, NAR said.
The median sales price of used homes hit $212,100 in March, up 7.8% from the year-earlier period.
On the bright side, for those who can obtain a mortgage, low rates should encourage borrowing by making it easier to afford a home.
“It seems we are seeing signs of increasing demand for mortgages used for purchases,” wrote Derek Lindsey, an analyst with BNP Paribas. “The spring buying season could show some impressive continued acceleration in sales.”
On Thursday markets will get a reading on March’s sales of new homes. Economists expect that the sales pace fell last month. New homes tend to be pricier than existing, or used, homes.
