New Star Wars Episode VII teaser trailer released.
The cast of the upcoming Star Wars film, directed by J.J. Abrams, began shooting in May.
Episode VII is scheduled for release on Dec. 18, 2015.
Director J.J. Abrams introduced the second trailer for "Star Wars: The Force Awakens" at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Anaheim, California, on April 16.
The trailer shows Harrison Ford reprising his role as Han Solo.
The movie's first teaser premiered on Nov 28, 2014.
J.J. Abrams and Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy gave Entertainment Weekly a preview of some characters in Episode VII.
They include a rolling droid named BB-8, an X-wing pilot named Poe Dameron, and the red light saber-toting Kylo Ren.
The stormtrooper played by John Boyega is named Finn.
Principal filming on "Star Wars" likely wrapped on Oct. 31, 2014, based on a note from director J.J. Abrams and the movie's producers.
The original tweet containing the note thanking the cast and crew was later deleted.
Stars of the film were also spotted at a wrap party in London on the evening of Nov. 1, 2014.
Disney confirmed in 2014 that the story takes place 30 years after "Return of the Jedi."
Filming went on hiatus in early August to make adjustments to the production schedule as Harrison Ford recovered from a leg injury suffered on the set.
An announcement in July 2014 said American actor Crystal Clarke (right) and British actor Pip Andersen (left) would be joining the cast.
The two were picked from some 67,000 hopefuls who applied online or attended open casting calls in 11 cities across the U.S. and UK.
Lucasfilm said in June 2014 that Lupita Nyong'o (left), who won an Oscar in 2014 for her role in "12 Years A Slave," and Gwendoline Christie (right), of "Game of Thrones," will join the cast of "Star Wars: Episode VII."
Actor Warwick Davis announced in a YouTube video posted in Oct. 2014 that he would be appearing in "Star Wars: Episode VII."
Davis first appeared in a Star Wars film at age 11, as Wicket the Ewok in "Return of the Jedi."
In "The Phantom Menace" he played three characters, including Yoda.
Lucasfilm announced in April 2014 that John Boyega, Daisy Ridley, Adam Driver, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson and Max von Sydow will join the original stars of the saga: Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Mark Hamill, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew and Kenny Baker.
"I thought it would be interesting if [lightsabers] were less precise, and just a little bit more spitty", Jonathan Ive, senior vice-president of design at Apple.
According to "The New Yorker," Ive gave J.J. Abrams "very specific" suggestions on how the new generation of lightsabers should look in the upcoming film.
Ive is quoted as saying that a redesigned lightsaber could be "more analog and more primitive, and I think, in that way, somehow more ominous."
