J.J. Abrams Reveals 'Star Wars Episode VII' Will Begin Shooting January 2014, Who Will Be In The Cast?
Director J.J. Abrams reveals that shooting for "Star Wars Episode VII" will begin in early 2014, the highly-anticipated continuation of the sci-fi franchise. Will Florence Welch from Florence and the Machine star in the newest installment?
During the PGA-sponsored "Produced By" conference at the 20th Century Fox lot, Abrams said that production will begin January 2014.
"Most likely we are going to be moving to London at the end of the year for the 'Star Wars' movie," he said, according to Deadline.
According to The Christian Science Monitor, all six "Star Wars" movies were produced in London. To keep with tradition, Abrams has agreed to move and relocate his family from Hollywood. This doesn't mean he's happy about it.
Abrams said the move "really does make me insane."
He told the Produced By conference: "We are, most likely, if all goes as planned, going to be moving to London at the end of the year for the 'Star Wars' movie."
The director says he is willing to make the sacrifice because of how important the film will be to fans.
The franchise, he said, "is so massive and so important to people. I think the key to moving forward on something like this is honoring but not revering what came before."
"Episode VII" is the first installment produced by Disney, which bought Lucasfilm last year and announced plans for at least three more "Star Wars" films, with "Episode VII" coming in 2015.
Fans are equally as excited for the alumni being invited back to the "Star Wars" cast. Allegedly, Mark Hammill (Luke Skywalker), Carrie Fisher (Princess Leia), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), and Billy Dee Williams (Lando Calrissian), will all make appearances in "Episode VII," The Christian Science Monitor reports.
According to The Sun, there is a rumor circulating that the lead singer of Florence and the Machine, Florence Welch, will star in the film.
A "Star Wars" insider told The Sun: "We think Florence has the exact style we are looking for. She has done some acting but it was her singing on stage that initially caught the eye. Almost every actress in Hollywood wants a role in the new movies but we are keen to cast people who are unexpected. "
"Florence is being considered for a major part that would turn her into an A-list actress overnight."
