Virgin America Seeks $1 Billion Valuation in U.S. IPO.
Virgin America Inc., the seven-year-old airline partially owned by U.K. billionaire Richard Branson, is valuing itself at as much as $1 billion in a U.S. initial public offering.
The company and its employees could raise as much as $320 million by offering investors 13.3 million shares for $21 to $24 apiece, according to a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission today. The total valuation is based on about 43.2 million shares outstanding after the IPO.
Virgin America and New York-based shareholder Cyrus Capital Partners LP have also agreed to sell about $52 million of shares in a private placement alongside the IPO, the filing shows. The Burlingame, California-based company will use its proceeds for capital expenditures, marketing, flight equipment and aircraft-operating leases.
Virgin America’s IPO comes as the airline industry finds itself in a sweet spot for the first time in years as jet kerosene heads for its first annual decline since 2008 while average ticket prices continue to climb. Optimism over carriers’ profits lifted the Bloomberg U.S. Airlines Index to a 13-year high last week.
As crude oil slumped this year, jet fuel prices have followed. At the same time, one-way domestic coach flights averaged $466 this year through September, a gain of 1.7 percent from last year, according to data compiled by Bloomberg Intelligence.
The IPO details were released amid a U.S. investigation into the cause of a crash by a spacecraft owned by Branson’s Virgin Galactic Ltd. in a California desert on Oct. 31, killing one pilot and injuring another. Branson, 64, said today that he’s confident there’s no fundamental flaw with the design of SpaceShipTwo, the destroyed spacecraft.
Virgin America’s $1 billion valuation is about 13.8 times the carrier’s annualized earnings for the nine months through September. That’s compared with a price-to-earnings ratio of about 16 for the Bloomberg U.S. Airlines Index.
Chief Executive Officer David Cush and Chief Financial Officer Peter Hunt declined to be interviewed today about the IPO or the airline’s financial results. The IPO would be the first for a U.S. commercial passenger airline since Spirit Airlines Inc. in 2011.
Virgin America posted net income of $56.2 million during the nine months through September, compared with a loss of $4 million a year earlier, the filing shows. Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and aircraft rent -- or Ebitdar, a metric commonly used in the airline industry -- rose 5 percent to $234.2 million.
The airline recently became the last major U.S. carrier to unionize, which could potentially raise costs at the company known for having expenses below those of rivals.
Virgin America started service in August 2007 and has a fleet of Airbus SAS A320 single-aisle jet. It flies to destinations including San Francisco, Los Angeles, Las Vegas, New York’s John F. Kennedy airport, Dallas and Boston.
Branson’s Virgin Group owns a 22 percent stake in Virgin America through VX Holdings LP.
Barclays Plc and Deutsche Bank AG are managing the offering. The shares will be listed on the Nasdaq Stock Market under the symbol VA.
