Hong Kong releases controversial election plan.
The proposal comes after months of protests in 2014 over a Beijing-back election plan.
Mainland Chinese lawmakers decided Aug. 31, 2014, that all candidates in Hong Kong's 2017 chief executive election must be vetted by a Beijing committee. Opposition candidates are unlikely to be approved. The decision to rule out open nominations set the stage for renewed protests.
The Hong Kong government released its blueprint on April 22 for 2017 elections for chief executive. Protesters gathered outside the Legislative Council. The plan came after reviewing comments from a wide range of Hong Kong society. It is almost identical to Beijing's plan in Aug. 2014 that set off pro-democracy protests.
"As of now, we see no room for any compromise. To initiate any political reform process is not easy. If this proposal is vetoed, it could be several years before the next opportunity."
The city's legislature will vote on the plan in June. If it does not get a two-thirds majority, the 2017 election will be based on current rules, which are also considered to give de facto control of the choice of the city's leader to Beijing. Protests are expected for the legislature vote.
"Hong Kong people are right to feel betrayed. It's certain now that [Beijing] will be effectively appointing Hong Kong's chief executive."
The elections will allow five million eligible Hong Kong voters to directly vote for their next chief executive. Candidates in the election, however, must receive 50% approval from a committee largely hand-picked by Beijing. Activists say Beijing promised direct elections in 2017.
Police used pepper spray and tear gas on protesters Sept. 28, 2014, prompting organizers to hand out umbrellas and plastic wrap as protection. The umbrellas became the symbol of the protests, which lasted over two months.
"I would not rule out any possibility [of running for reelection as chief executive in 2017]. Whether to seek a second term is something [I'll consider] in later days."
Leung's comments came March 24, when he also ruled out a proposed televised debate on election reform.
A report by a UK parliament committee on March 6 expressed concern that Hong Kong's "high degree of autonomy is coming under pressure" from mainland China. China responded that the UK, which ran Hong Kong for nearly 150 years, has "no right to interfere" in what China considers a domestic issue. Hong Kong pro-democracy leaders applauded the UK report.
China said April 13 that it changed visa allowances for Shenzhen residents to visit Hong Kong from unlimited multiple-entry to once per week. Although the central government cited overwhelming numbers of tourists as the reason for the limit, many so-called "parallel traders" come from Shenzhen.
"The University of Hong Kong is an international institution. Our students should have international exposure, not confined only to mainland China, and should not be specified to mainland China."
Ian Holliday, a professor and university vice president, apologized April 20 for suggesting during a dinner with students April 17 that students should be required to do exchanges on mainland China. Holliday met with students and explained that he wanted students to be "global citizens with China knowledge."
