Brazil’s Petrobras Reports Nearly $17 Billion in Asset and Corruption Charges.
State-run oil company writes off $2.1 billion of alleged bribe payments.
Brazil’s state oil company Petróleo Brasileiro SA put a price tag on a corruption scandal that has thrown the country into political and economic turmoil, writing off $17 billion due to losses from graft and overvalued assets.
The disclosures were part of the first audited financial statements released by Petrobras in more than eight months.
Brazilian federal prosecutors since last year have been investigating allegations that the company’s suppliers conspired to overcharge Petrobras for major projects, funneling some of the illicit profit to former Petrobras executives and politicians in the form of bribes and illegal political donations.
Petrobras Chief Executive Aldemir Bendine said in a news conference that additional revisions to the corruption-related write-downs are possible if prosecutors uncover more wrongdoing. But he also said an outside auditor approved Petrobras’s earnings “without any reservations.” That could ease investor concerns about the likelihood of major impairment charges in the future.
“We were conservative with this number. We might not reach it, but it was a way to give credibility,” Mr. Bendine said. “We have made our best efforts to turn the page on this sad chapter that the company has passed through.”
The corruption scandal has toppled Petrobras’s leadership, battered its shares and dragged on Brazil’s economy, which most economists expect to fall into recession this year. The events surrounding Petrobras have slowed both the construction sector and the oil industry, leading to reduced spending, thousands of layoffs and several bankruptcies.
U.K.-based Oxford Economics, an economic researcher, said on Wednesday that Petrobras’s need to slash investments could “tip the Brazilian economy into a deeper-than-expected recession.”
Petrobras has portrayed itself as a victim of the graft and says it has cooperated with authorities. Still, the company struggled to calculate the alleged scheme’s impact on its balance sheet, leading auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers to refuse to sign off on its statements since the third quarter of 2014.
The company wrote off 6.2 billion reais ($2.1 billion) due to alleged graft and another 44.6 billion reais for overvalued assets, including refineries. As a result, Petrobras on Wednesday reported a net loss of 26.6 billion reais for the fourth quarter on revenue of 85.04 billion reais.
Mr. Bendine also said on Wednesday that the company won’t pay dividends. Petrobras paid 8.735 billion reais in dividends during 2014.
The development comes days before an April 30 deadline in Petrobras’s bond covenants that could have allowed the holders of billions of dollars of Petrobras debt to demand early repayment, a possibility that prompted Moody’s to yank the company’s investment-grade rating in February. Petrobras has been locked out of capital markets since late 2014 due to repeated delays in its financial statements.
Expectations that Petrobras would manage to publish audited earnings before the deadline caused the company’s shares to rally more than 40% over the past month. But experts say Petrobras must clear a series of remaining hurdles if it hopes to regain investors’ confidence.
“This helps restore the company’s credibility, but there’s still a lot they have to do,” said Adriano Pires, president of the Brazilian Infrastructure Center, an energy consultancy, of the earnings. “Today’s numbers show Petrobras is in a very difficult situation. They show the damage the government has done to the company.”
The world’s most indebted major oil company, Petrobras now faces the challenge of paying down more than 350.8 billion reais in total debt at a time when oil prices are nearly 50% below year-ago levels.
To shore up its balance sheet, the company has scaled back an ambitious investment plan for its deepwater oil fields. Petrobras slashed capital spending to 87.14 billion reais in 2014, down from 104.4 billion reais in 2013.
The company said last month it plans to sell an estimated $13.7 billion of assets in the next two years—a task that could be challenging at current oil prices.
“It’s difficult to believe the company will get the best possible values,” said a large investor in Brazilian stocks. “There are a lot of assets on sale and not many buyers.”
Last week, Petrobras concluded negotiations on 9.5 billion reais of financing agreements with Brazilian banks, plus a $3 billion deal with Standard Chartered Bank for the sale and lease of production platforms. It also lined up $3.5 billion in financing from the China Development Bank at the beginning of April.
More broadly, investors say the company needs to improve its governance. The Brazilian government, which is Petrobras’s largest shareholder, now nominates most of the company’s board, including its chairman. Brasília has ordered Petrobras to subsidize fuel prices in recent years while the company was simultaneously executing a massive investment plan, leading it to burn billions of dollars in cash.
Troubles at Petrobras have weighed on President Dilma Rousseff, whose popularity has plummeted in the wake of the scandal. Hundreds of thousands of Brazilians have taken to the streets in two mass protests in recent weeks to demand the ouster of the president and her ruling Workers’ Party, whom many blame for Brazil’s faltering economy and a climate of corruption that has crippled the nation’s most important company.
Ms. Rousseff, who was chairwoman of Petrobras between 2003 and 2010, hasn’t been implicated in the graft ring, and she has denied knowledge of any wrongdoing at Petrobras. But most Brazilians don’t believe her; in a survey by the Datafolha polling company taken in mid-March, 84% of the nearly 3,000 Brazilians asked said they believed the president knew about the corruption scheme at the oil company.
Also on Wednesday, a federal judge found Petrobras’ former downstream director, Paulo Roberto Costa, guilty of money laundering and criminal conspiracy, along with several other suspected members of the corruption ring. Mr. Costa, who admitted to accepting bribes as part of a plea deal with prosecutors last year, is facing additional charges of corruption.
