Brazil's Petrobras lost $17 billion in 2014.
Dozens of Brazilians have been indicted in a wide-ranging corruption probe involving the state-owned oil company Petrobras.
Petrobras lost over $17 billion in 2014 from graft and overvalued assets, according to CEO Aldemir Bendine on April 22. The bribery and corruption scandal alone, dubbed "Operation Car Wash," cost the company $2.1 billion.
In its first audited financial results since Aug. 2014, Petrobras reported on April 22 that it lost $8.8 billion in Q4 2014 due to corruption, oil price pressures, refinery cost overruns, and other factors.
Bendine said Petrobras' "second challenge" will be to draft a five year business plan, expected to be released within 30 days.
A wide-ranging corruption probe launched after the March 2014 arrest of Paulo Roberto Costa, Petrobras' former chief of refining. Seeking leniency, Costa shed light on $3.7 billion in questionable payments Petrobras made from slush funds to Brazil's Workers' Party and other political parties.
Brazilian Workers' Party ex-treasurer Joao Vaccari was arrested April 15 in connection with the Petrobras scandal. He was indicted in mid-March on charges including money laundering and accepting kickbacks. Although the Workers' Party said he was innocent, he resigned after his arrest.
On March 15, almost 1 million Brazilians marched in protests in more than 50 cities calling for the ouster of President Rousseff. Protesters insist Rousseff must have known about the accusations of corruption and political bribes at Petrobras while she chaired its board. More rallies were held April 12.
Switzerland froze assets worth $400 million on March 18 as multiple investigations into money laundering widened. Bern-based federal prosecutors said in a March 18 statement that the frozen assets were identified in more than 300 accounts in 30 banks and were used for bribery in Brazil.
Petrobras said on April 1 that it had taken $3.5 billion in financing from China Development Bank. Details were not given other than that the money is part of a two-year cooperation agreement.
Julio Marcelo de Oliveira, prosecutor for Brazil, asked the country's Federal Audits Court on Feb. 19 to stop "leniency agreements" that allow companies accused of involvement in the Petrobras scandal to continue bidding on federal contracts while still under investigation.
If companies fully cooperate with authorities in the Petrobras investigation, exceptions could be made, de Oliveira said. Brazil's federal prosecutors said Feb. 19 that they will seek about $1.55 billion in compensation from six construction and engineering companies accused of paying bribes to Petrobras.
Credit ratings firm Standard & Poor's on March 23 cut its outlook on Petrobras to negative from stable after affirming the company's BBB-, or "junk," status. Moody's did the same in late February, causing the Brazilian stock index Ibovespa to fall by 0.1% -- the biggest loss of any major world index that day.
