German intelligence agency helped NSA spy in Europe.
Spying by the National Security Agency (NSA) revealed by Edward Snowden has sparked criticism from European politicians and citizens.
Germany's BND intelligence agency spied on politicians and companies in Europe for the NSA for more than a decade, Der Spiegel reported April 23. The BND used thousands of "selectors" sent by the NSA that included IP addresses, emails, and phone numbers. Spiegel also reported in 2013 of BNA-NSA cooperation.
German officials in Oct. 2014 refused to relinquish intelligence documents that would illuminate the nature of government spy agencies' relationships with the U.S, the AP reported. It's uncertain if parliamentarians have legal mechanisms to force the agencies to produce the documents.
A 31-year-old German intelligence worker was arrested in July 2014 on accusations of passing information about the parliamentary inquiry into the NSA to an American contact.
Despite outcry from European leaders over the leaks, Snowden told Der Spiegel in 2013 that the NSA is "in bed together with the Germans and most other Western states." He said a system was set up to "insulate" European leaders from potential backlash in case details of the partnership emerged.
Der Spiegel in 2013 revealed the NSA's Special Collection Service may have been monitoring Chancellor Angela Merkel's mobile phone since 2002. Merkel was listed in an NSA document cited by Der Spiegel, but it wasn't clear if her conversations were recorded.
A German parliamentary committee investigating the NSA's activities voted June 5 to question Edward Snowden in Moscow. Snowden said he wanted to testify before the committee in Berlin, but the German government could not give assurances that he wouldn't be detained and extradited to the U.S.
Reports published in the New York Times and the Guardian in Dec. 2013 revealed a list of over 1,000 NSA and UK GCHQ spying targets including charities Medecins du Monde and UNICEF, and world leaders such as former Israeli PM Ehud Olmert and European Commission vice president Joaquin Almunia.
The Spanish newspaper El Mundo reported in Oct. 2013 that the NSA collected more than 60 million phone records in Spain in Dec. 2012. The NSA did not listen to conversations, but got device serial numbers, phone numbers, locations and call durations. It also intercepted data from emails and social networks.
French paper Le Monde reported in Oct. 2013 that documents leaked by Edward Snowden show that from Dec. 10, 2012, to Jan. 7, 2013, the NSA intercepted and collected 70.3 million phone records of French citizens, or about 3 million per day. France immediately summoned the U.S. ambassador.
"We will find a way, if Mr. Snowden is willing to talk."
Friedrich, Germany's minister responsible for national security said he is keen to speak to Snowden over allegations that the NSA monitored Chancellor Angela Merkel's phone calls. His spokesman suggested such a meeting could happen in Russia.
