Volkswagen Posts a Rise in Car Sales.
But Sales Continue to Fall in Russia, the U.S. and Brazil.
Volkswagen AG, Europe's biggest automotive group, said sales of its namesake brand cars in the first eight months of the year rose 3.4%, but growth nearly stalled in August and sales continue falling sharply in Russia, the U.S. and Brazil.
The Volkswagen brand, which includes the Golf compact, Passat sedans and station wagons, and the Tiguan and Touran sport-utility vehicles, sold 4.3 million vehicles from January to August, up from 3.9 million last year, mainly on the back of strong growth in China and a recovery of Western European car markets.
Growth slowed markedly in August. Volkswagen said sales of the VW brand rose just 0.1% in August to 471,000 cars, up from 470,500 last year.
"We are still feeling the effects of the very challenging situation on world markets. However, we also continue to benefit from the tailwind in China and Western Europe," Christian Klingler, board member for sales and marketing for the Volkswagen Group and the Volkswagen Passenger Cars brand, said in a statement on Tuesday.
Volkswagen brand sales rose 17% to 1.8 million in China in the first eight months of the year. In Europe, sales rose 2.9% to 1.1 million.
The Wolfsburg, Germany-based car maker's effort to overtake Toyota Motor Co as the world's biggest automotive group by sales is beginning to sputter as sales erode in markets where VW had hope to grow.
Until Ukraine crisis wreaked havoc on the Russian economy, Russia was set to overtake Germany as Europe's biggest car market. Overall car sales in Russia plunged in August, falling more than 25% from a year ago. The decline is hitting western auto makers hard.
Volkswagen said this week it will shut its Kaluga, Russia factory for 10 days in September to adjust to falling demand. In the first eight months of the year, VW brand sales to Russia fell 18% to 85,000 vehicles.
Failure to respond quickly to changing tastes on the U.S. market has slowed VW's recovery of sales in the U.S., casting doubt on the company's goal of selling 800,000 vehicles a year in the U.S. by 2018. VW brand sales are down 13.4% so far this year, declining to 244,900 at the end of August from 282,900 a year ago.
