China’s New Most Polluted City: Baoding.
A northeastern Chinese city famed for its donkey burgers now has another title to add to its calling card: home to China’s filthiest air.
Every year, competition to win the dubious distinction of having China’s dirtiest skies is fierce. The country is home to notoriously carcinogenic air, which according to some analysts contribute to as many as 1.2 million deaths in a single year. This year, Baoding – a city that his home to 11 million people as well as numerous heavy industries — carried off the honors.
Among the top 10 cities cited on Monday by the country’s environmental ministry as having the country’s worst air in 2014, seven – including Baoding — are in Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing. The list remains only slightly changed from last year, with nine of the same 10 worst offenders making an appearance in the rankings.
All the same, the ministry said progress had been made. Compared with last year, among the country’s largest cities, it said, 66% of days met air standards, up from 60% the year prior. “Air-pollution management work has started to show signs of impact,” it said. It credited a set of 2013 measures that required better regional air-quality planning and specific pollutant-reduction targets for certain major cities such as Beijing and Shanghai, among other efforts.
Baoding’s plight has been well-reported in state media, with reports last year declaring that the city was planning to close traditional factories in hopes of attracting cleaner industries.
Such transitions aren’t easy. The nearby city of Xingtai – which last year claimed the title of worst air – has ordered power plants closed and seen it drop to No. 2 in the countrywide rankings. Now residents worry that the local economy will be damaged.
Back in Baoding, the weather bureau says it is expecting heavy smog in the coming days. On its verified Weibo account yesterday, it also included its own postscript: “Oh! NO!” adding, “When you leave your house, check the weather. If you have to wear a mask, wear a mask.”
