Air quality in 90% of Chinese cities is poor, Greenpeace says.
Persistent pollution continues to be an everyday health threat for many people in China.
"Despite modest improvements in high profile cities like Beijing, the figures paint a grim picture overall."
An April 21 report by Greenpeace says 90% of 360 Chinese cities it studied failed to meet China's air quality standards in the previous 12 months. The report, however, gives China credit for "unprecedented transparency" in sharing data and for some improvements in air quality.
China's Ministry of Environmental Protection said Feb. 1 that 66 of 74 cities failed to meet air pollution targets in 2014. Seven of the ten most polluted cities were in Hebei Province, which surrounds the Beijing municipality. The most polluted city in China was Baoding, also in Hebei.
Chinese cities often have unsafe levels of PM2.5 particles, which come mostly from vehicles and power plants burning fuels. The particles, which measure about 1/30th the average width of a human hair, can penetrate deep into people's lungs.
China will launch a 50 billion yuan ($8.13 billion) fund to combat pollution, according to the official China Securities Journal in Dec. 2014. The fund will incentivize industry and local authorities to tackle pollution in a meaningful way.
Beijing's air pollution went "beyond index" on Jan. 15, meaning it exceeded the scale's highest reading of 500, according to the U.S. Embassy in Beijing. Both the PM2.5 and larger PM10 levels in the city were extremely high by midday. Pollution has exceeded the index several times, most recently in October 2014.
The Beijing government said it would begin collecting fees from construction sites that contribute to dust pollution in the city starting March 1. The Beijing Municipal Research Institute of Environmental Protection said dust accounts for approximately 14% of PM 2.5 in Beijing.
China will add 200,000 alternative fuel public buses and 100,000 alternative fuel taxis by 2020, China's Transport Ministry said March 18, according to the AP.
On March 7, the air pollution film "Under the Dome" was taken down from major streaming video websites in China. However, discussion of the film, which had received tens of millions of more views since March 2 when it passed 100 million views, is reportedly still being allowed on social media sites.
"Chai Jing's documentary calls for public environmental consciousness from the standpoint of public health. It deserves admiration."
The film was released Feb. 28, less than a week before the start of the Chinese government's annual, rubber-stamp legislative meeting, which is now in session. Air quality control has often been an important issue at the meeting, and new environmental minister Chen publicly endorsed the film earlier in the week.
On March 24, IOC officials began a 5-day tour of Beijing, which is bidding for the 2022 Winter Games. Zhang Jiandong, vice-chair of Beijing's bid committee said that the city has "the confidence" that it can reduce pollution before the Games.
