sent_1:

Germany's top security official says he will try to organize a meeting between German investigators and Edward Snowden if he's willing to give details about the National Security Agency's alleged monitoring of Chancellor Angela Merkel and other politicians' communications.
Friedrich, Germany's minister responsible for national security said he is keen to speak to Snowden over allegations that the NSA monitored Chancellor Angela Merkel's phone calls.
8 best matches: snowden, germany's, national, monitor, chancellor, say, angela, security

----------------
sent_2:

Hans-Peter Friedrich was quoted by Die Zeit newspaper Friday saying that "we will find a way, if Mr. Snowden is willing to talk."
"We will find a way, if Mr. Snowden is willing to talk."
6 best matches: talk, willing, snowden, mr, way, find

----------------
sent_3:

His spokesman Jens Teschke confirmed the comments, saying "we want clarification and we want further information."
Snowden said he wanted to testify before the committee in Berlin, but the German government could not give assurances that he wouldn't be detained and extradited to the U.S.
2 best matches: want, say

----------------
sent_4:

He said he assumed such a meeting would be in Russia.
His spokesman suggested such a meeting could happen in Russia.
2 best matches: meeting, russia

----------------
sent_5:

Opposition Greens lawmaker Hans-Christian Stroebele said he met with Snowden, a former NSA contractor, in Moscow on Thursday and that he was prepared to travel to Germany to testify.
Snowden said he wanted to testify before the committee in Berlin, but the German government could not give assurances that he wouldn't be detained and extradited to the U.S.
3 best matches: snowden, testify, say

----------------
sent_6:

Germany's parliament is expected to discuss the NSA's alleged activities Nov. 18.
A German parliamentary committee investigating the NSA's activities voted June 5 to question Edward Snowden in Moscow.
2 best matches: nsa's, activity

----------------
